## Credit Card Fraud Detection

## Overview
This project investigates the usage of machine learing models to detect credit card fraud using a synthetic dataset. The ML models created and evaluated for predicting credit card fraud are a Random Forest model and a Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) model. 

## Dataset
The dataset used in this project was obtained from Kaggle. It is s a synthetic dataset, whose author is Erik Altman. The data was generated by IBM to simulate credit card purchases for over 2000 synthetic users with over 20 million total transactions. The dataset contains a transactions dataset and a user dataset. 

## Dependencies
<ul>
  <li>category_encoders</li>
  <li>pandas</li>
  <li>matplotlib</li>
  <li>numpy</li>
  <li>seaborn</li>
  <li>sklearn.metrics</li>
  <li>sklearn.model_selection</li>
  <li>sklearn.utils.class_weight</li>
  <li>tensorflow.keras.models</li>
  <li>tensorflow.keras.layers</li>
  <li>tensorflow.keras.preprocessing.sequence</li>
  <li>sklearn.ensemble</li>
  <li>sklearn.metrics</li>
  <li>sklearn.preprocessing</li>
  <li>tensorflow</li>
  <li>tensorflow.keras.callbacks</li>
  <li>tensorflow.keras.utils</li>
  <li>tensorflow.keras.optimizers.legacy</li>
  <li>time</li>
</ul>

## Findings
The two models that were trained and evaluated as part of this project successfully identified fraudulent credit card transactions. Using class balancing to address the imbalance between legitimate and fraudulent transactions proved to be critical to producing models that were capable of detecting fraud. 
The Random Forest model was better at producing a balanced approach to identifying fraud, maintaining a high precision, but also demonstrating effective recall. This model will perform better in environments where minimizing false positives is necessary. Alternatively, the LSTM model had a significantly higher recall but suffered a low precision as a result. This model will perform better in environments where detecting fraudulent transactions are worth the cost of a high false positive rate. 
Further refinement of the models could be achieved with more time and computational resources. Using the full dataset would help this model perform better for all transaction types instead of those only found in online transactions. 
Ultimately, this project provided insights into the methodology behind developing robust fraud detection systems and illustrated how machine learning has made it possible for financial institutions and businesses to detect fraud using more than traditional rule-based systems. These models can be further refined for use with real-world datasets and with some enhancements, may find applicability outside of the target domain of detecting credit card fraud. 

